---
layout: default
title: 2A. Finite generation and the Noetherian property
parent: Course Content
nav_order: 2.8
---

## Finite generation and the Noetherian Property.

Let $R$ be a ring and $M$ a left $R$ module.   $M$ is finitely generated if there are finitely
many elements $m_1,\ldots, m_k\in M$ so that, for any $m\in M$, there are $r_i\in R$, such
that

$$
m = \sum_{i=1}^{k} r_{i} m_{i}.
$$

Equivalently, $M$ is finitely generated if, for some $n\ge 0$ in $\Z$ there is a surjective $R$-module homomorphism 

$$
\pi: \oplus_{i=1}^{n} R =R^{n}\to M. 
$$

The images of the basis elements of $R^{n}$ give the generating set $m_{i}$. 

**Definition:** A module $M$ satisfies the *ascending chain condition* if any increasing sequence of submodules
$$
M_{1}\subset M_{2}\subset\cdots\subset M_{k}\subset
$$
eventually stabilizes, meaning that there is an $N$ so that $M_{i}=M_{j}$ for all $i,j\ge N$.

**Proposition:** The following are equivalent:

1.  $M$ satisfies the ascending chain condition.
2.  Every nonempty set of submodules of $M$ has a maximal element.
3.  Every submodule of $M$ is finitely generated.

A module that satisfies these equivalent conditions is called (left) *Noetherian* after [Emmy Noether](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emmy_Noether).
A ring is Noetherian if it is Noetherian as a left module over itself.  Since the submodules of a ring are the ideals, a ring is Noetherian
if every ideal is finitely generated.

**Proof:** Suppose $M$ satisfies the ascending chain condition and let $\mathcal{M}$ be a nonempty collection of submodules of $M$.  Every ascending
chain in $\mathcal{M}$ has a maximal element (that's basically what the chain condition says) and therefore by Zorn's lemma there is a maximal element for $\mathcal{M}$. 
Now suppose $N$ is any submodule of $M$.  Let $\mathcal{N}$ be the collection of finitely generated submodules of $N$.  Since the zero module is in $\mathcal{N}$, it is nonempty,
so it has a maximal element $N'\subset N$.  Choose $x\in N$.  Then $N'+Rx$ is a finitely generated submodule of $N$, and since $N'$ is maximal, we must have  $N'+Rx=N'$.  This means $x\in N'$.  Therefore $N=N'$ so $N$ is finitely
generated.  Finally, if 
$$
M_1\subset M_2\subset \cdots
$$
 is an increasing chain of submodules, their union $M_{\infty}$ is a submodule which must be finitely generated by, say, $m_1,\ldots, m_n$.  Then
there is an integer $k$ such that $M_{k}$ that contains $m_1,\ldots, m_n$ so $M_{k}=M_{\infty}$ and the increasing chain stabilizes at $k$.

**Proposition:** Any principal ideal domain is Noetherian. 

**Proof:** Any ideal is generated by one element. 

**Proposition:** If $M$ is Noetherian, so is any quotient module of $M$.

**Proof:** Suppose $N=M/J$ where $J$ is a submodule of $M$.  If $K\subset N$ is a submodule, then by the isomorphism theorem $K=K'/J$ for some $K'\subset M$ containing $J$.  Since $M$
is Noetherian, $K'$ is finitely generated by, say $k_1,\ldots, k_r$ and then the corresponding $k_{i}+J$ generate $N$.

**Proposition:** If $R$ is Noetherian, so is $R^{n}$.

**Proof:** By induction on $n$.  We know the result for $n=1$.  Suppose it's true for $R^{n-1}$.  Let $M$ be a submodule of $R^{n}=R^{n-1}\oplus R$. Let $\pi: M\to R$ be the 
projection of $M$ onto the last component.  Then $\pi(M)$ is an ideal of $R$, hence finitely generated.  If $x_1,\ldots,x_k$ generate $\pi(M)$, then we know that each $x_i=\pi(m_i)$ for
$m_i\in M$ and also, for any $m\in M$, we have
$$
\phi(m)=\sum r_i x_i =\phi(\sum r_{i}m_{i}).
$$
This means that any $m\in M$ can be written $m=m_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{k} r_{i}m_{i}$ with $m_{0}\in \ker(\pi)\subset R^{n-1}$.  Since $\ker(\pi)$ is finitely generated by induction, this shows
that $M$ is finitely generated (by the finite set of generators for $\ker(M)$ together with $m_1,\ldots, m_k$)

**Proposition:** If $R$ is Noetherian, and $M$ is a finitely generated $R$-module, then $M$ is Noetherian. 

**Proof:** In this case $M$ is a quotient of $R^{n}$. 

**Proposition:** (Hilbert) If $R$ is Noetherian, so is $R[x]$. This is called the Hilbert Basis Theorem; we won't prove it.  Paul Gordan is alleged to have said of this result "This isn't mathematics, it is theology!" (quite possibly this is just a folk tale in mathematics. )

### Non-noetherian rings and modules

The polynomial ring in countably many variables is not Noetherian.  The ring of continuous functions on $\R$ (or on $[-1,1]$) is not Noetherian because you can let $M_{i}$ be the space of continuous functions
which vanish on $[-1/i,1/i]$ for $i=1,\ldots$. These are ideals in the ring and we have $M_{i}\subset M_{i+1}$ but the sequence doesn't stabilize. 

- There are finitely generated modules (over non-Noetherian rings) whose submodules are not finitely generated.
- There are modules over non-commutative rings that are left-Noetherian, but not right-Noetherian.
