---
layout: default
title: 3. Modules over PIDs
nav_order: 3.0
parent: Course Content
---

## Finitely Generated Modules over Principal Ideal Domains

### Main Theorem

Our goal is to prove the classification theorem for finitely generated modules over PID's, which asserts that every finitely generated module over a PID
is the direct sum of a free module and a finite set of cyclic modules.  Depending on how you describe the cyclic modules you get different uniqueness statements.

**Theorem:** Let $R$ be a principal ideal domain and let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$ module.  Then there is an integer $k$ and 
elements $\pi_1,\ldots, \pi_m$ in $R$ such that $\pi_1\vert \pi_2\vert\cdots\vert \pi_m$ such that

$$
M=R^{k}\oplus R/\pi_1 R\oplus\cdots \oplus R/\pi_m R.
$$

Further, the integer $k$ and the ideals $\pi_i R$ are uniquely determined by $M$. The ideals $\pi_i R$ are called the invariant factors of $M$,
and the integer $k$ is its rank. 

Notice that if $R=\Z$ and $M$ is finite then this is the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups with the $\pi_i$ being the invariant factors.

### Alternative formulation

**Theorem:** Let $R$ be a PID and let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$ module.  Then there is an integer $k$ and elements $\pi_i\in R$ such that $\pi_i$ is a prime
power and

$$
M=R^{k}\oplus R/\pi_1 R\oplus\cdots \oplus R/\pi_m R.
$$

Again, the rank $k$ and the prime power factors $\pi_i$ are unique (up to ordering in this case).  

The prime powers $\pi_i$ are called the elementary divisors of $M$. 

If $R=\Z$ this is the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups, asserting that every such group is a finite product of cyclic groups of prime power order,
and that the prime powers are unique up to ordering. 

### Strategy

Our strategy is to adapt ideas from linear algebra and approach the problem algorithmically. 

Suppose that $M$ is generated by $n$ elements $e_1,\ldots, e_n$ over the PID $R$.  Then there is a surjective map
$$
\pi: R^{n}\to M 
$$
defined by $\pi((r_1,\ldots, r_n))=\sum_{i=1}^{n} r_i e_i$.  

If $f=(r_1,\ldots, r_n)$ is in the kernel of $\pi$, then

$$
\sum_{i=1}^{n} r_{i}e_{i}=0.
$$

Because of this, elements of the kernel of $\pi$ are called *relations* for the generators $e_{i}$, and $N$ is called the module of relations for $M$.

Since the relation module $N$ of this map is a submodule of $R^{n}$, we know from our discussion of finite generation is generated by (at most) $n$ elements $f_1,\ldots, f_n$. 

Let's assume that our relation module has  $n$ generators $f_{1},\ldots, f_{n}$, some of which might be zero.  


### The relation matrix

Expressing $f_j$ in terms of the $e_i$ yields an $n\times n$ matrix $A=(a_{ij})$ defined by:

$$
f_j = \sum a_{ji} e_i 
$$

The columns of the matrix $A$ express the generators $f_j$ of the kernel of $\pi$ in terms of the basis $e_i$ for $R^{n}$.

$A$ is called a relation matrix for $M$.

### The kernel as column space of the relation matrix

If, as we do in linear algebra, we express elements of $R^{n}$ as column vectors with $R$ entries, we have a map

$$
a: R^{n}\to R^{n}
$$

defined by $a(v)=Av$ (matrix multiplication by $A$ on a column vector $v$ with entries in $R$).  
If the entries of $v$ are $(r_1,\ldots, r_n)$ then $a(v)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} r_i f_i$ and therefore the image of the $R$-linear map $a$
is $N$.

### Standard form

We've reached a point where our module $M$ is isomorphic to $R^{n}/N$ where $N$ is generated by the columns of our matrix $A$.

We will show the following:

- $N$ is free of rank $m$ where $m\le n$.
- $M$ has a basis $y_1,\ldots, y_m$ with the property  that there are elements $b_1,\ldots, b_m\in R$ such that $b_1\vert b_2\vert\cdots \vert b_m$
and $b_1 y_1, b_2 y_2,\ldots, b_m y_m$ are a basis for $N$. 

In terms of the relation matrix, we are saying that if we choose our basis $e_1,\ldots, e_n$ and $f_1,\ldots, f_n$ properly, then the corresponding matrix
$A$ is diagonal with entries $b_1, b_2, \ldots, b_m, 0,0\ldots 0$ and $b_1\vert b_2\vert\cdots\vert b_m$. 

We will do this by modifying the set of generators $f_j$ and $e_i$ so that, at each stage, they continue to be sets of generators, but eventually they have
the desired relation.

### The result from standard form

If we achieve the standard form, then we have the picture
$$
R^{n}\to M 
$$
where

$$
(r_1,\ldots, r_n)\mapsto \sum r_{i}y_{i}
$$

and the kernel of this map is 

$$
N=b_1 y_1 \oplus b_2 y_2 \oplus \cdots\oplus b_m y_m.
$$

Therefore $R^{n}/N=R/b_1 R \oplus\cdots R/b_m R\oplus R^{n-m}$ which is the structure we are trying to establish.

<div>
<a href="slides/03-PIDmodules.html"> View as slides </a>
</div>